Part 6 of Diving into JTAG (#501)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/diving-into-jtag-part6.md

---
title: Diving into JTAG — Security (Part 6)
description: "Overview of security and hacking of JTAG"
author: zamuhrishka
tags: [arm, cortex-m, mcu, debugging, debugger]
---

<!-- excerpt start -->

The JTAG interface is an important tool for debugging and testing embedded
systems, providing low-level access to the internal workings of microcontrollers
and other integrated circuits. However, this powerful interface also presents
significant security threats. In the sixth part of the "Diving into JTAG"
article series, we will focus on security issues related to JTAG and the Debug Port.

<!-- excerpt end -->

{% include newsletter.html %}

{% include toc.html %}

>**Disclaimer 1**: I am not a cyber-security expert and not deeply immersed in this
topic, so this article does not aim to uncover any secrets or provide an in-depth exploration.

> It is simply a superficial look at this topic from an ordinary firmware engineer.

Author: Fixed

>**Disclaimer 2**: This article is for informational purposes only and is not a guide to action.

> Hacking devices is wrong and illegal.

Author: Fixed

# Protection

Let's start by considering simple protection methods that can be applied to make life more difficult
for an attacker who wants to gain unauthorized access to a device using the JTAG interface.

## Board-Level

The simplest, most obvious, but probably least effective method of protection is to restrict access to
the JTAG connector at the board level. This restriction is achieved by physically removing the JTAG
connector from the board at the end of production.

<p align="center">

>  <img width="100%" src="{% img_url jtag-part6/board-level-protection-1.png %}" alt="The Board-level protection example 1" />

Author: Fixed

>  <img width="100%" src="{% img_url jtag-part6/board-level-protection-1.png %}" alt="The Board-level protection example 1" />

Reviewer: Hmm the pictures look the same -- could you double check that you uploaded them?

>  <img width="100%" src="{% img_url jtag-part6/board-level-protection-1.png %}" alt="The Board-level protection example 1" />

Author: Sorry about that. I forgot to update the pictures.

<p align="center">
 <img width="100%" src="{% img_url jtag-part6/board-level-protection-2.png %}" alt="The Board-level protection example 2" />
</p>

However, as you well understand, these methods provide only the most basic protection, as soldering a
JTAG connector is not a significant effort, nor is finding the necessary JTAG pins on the microcontroller,
especially when its part number is written on the package, as shown in the photo. But even if the
microcontroller is unknown, there are ways to scan the pins of the microcontroller to discover the necessary
JTAG pins (I will discuss these methods in more detail later).

## Chip-Level

Debug interfaces are convenient during device development and debugging, but
it is good practice to disable them in the release version of the device/firmware.
There are configurable bits in the microcontroller's non-volatile memory to disable
certain debug interface functions. The flexibility of configuring protection
features depends on the specific core and microcontroller model.

For instance, access to flash memory can be disabled. Some microcontroller models
support completely disabling the debug interface. The exact configuration of possible

> protection features can be found in the microcontroller's documentation. An example is

Author: Fixed.

<p align="center">
 <img width="100%" src="{% img_url jtag-part6/rdp-levels.png %}" alt="The RDP Levels" />
</p>

RDP has three levels of protection (0, 1, and 2):

 - **Level 0** (default RDP level)
The flash memory is fully open, and all memory operations are possible in all boot
configurations (debug features, boot from RAM, boot from system memory bootloader,
boot from flash memory). There is no protection in this configuration mode that is
appropriate only for development and debug.
- **Level 1**
Flash memory accesses (read, erase, program), or SRAM2 accesses via debug features
(such as serial-wire or JTAG) are forbidden, even while booting from SRAM or system
memory bootloader. In these cases, any read request to the protected region generates
a bus error. However, when booting from flash memory, accesses to both flash memory
and to SRAM2 (from user code) are allowed.
- **Level 2**
All protections provided in Level 1 are active, and the MCU is fully protected. The
RDP option byte and all other option bytes are frozen, and can no longer be modified.
The JTAG, SWV (single-wire viewer), ETM, and boundary scan are all disabled.

> RDP can always be leveled up. A level regression is possible with the following

Reviewer: For those unfamiliar with this protection mechanism, could you describe the situations in which you would level up and down? Without having read about it before, I'm thinking the main use case is if you want to re-program a device that has a RDP level set, e.g. in the case of a production device device that has been returned and you are manually fixing it.

Author: Fixed

consider the main and most well-known of them.

In general, all attacks can be divided into the following types:

- Software attacks are carried out in particular by exploiting bugs, weaknesses
  in protocols or untrusted code fragments. Attacks on communication channels
  (interception or usurpation) fall into this category. Software attacks account
  for the vast majority of cases. Their cost can be very low. They can be widespread
  and repeatable with tremendous damage. It is not necessary to have physical access
  to the device. The attack can be performed remotely.
- Hardware attacks require physical access to the device. The most obvious one uses
  the debug port if it is not secured. In general, however, hardware attacks are
  complex and can be very expensive. They are carried out with specialized materials
  and require electronics skills. A distinction is made between non-invasive attacks
  (carried out at the board or chip level without destroying the device) and invasive
  attacks (carried out at the device and silicon level with destruction of the package).

Attacks on the JTAG interface belong to the hardware none-invasive attack type.

## Detecting JTAG pins

> If there is absolutely no documentation for a given chip, the first thing to do

Reviewer: I'm thinking we phrase this in the context of an attacker since you are looking to describe not instruct on hacking approaches :)
```suggestion
If there is absolutely no documentation for a given chip, the first thing an attacker would do
```

Author: Oops... :)

   that you have selected the pins correctly.

This algorithm is slower than the previous one, but it can detect all JTAG pins.

>If you have a lot of candidate output, it is recommended to first reduce the number
of candidates using `IDCODE Scan` and then refine `BYPASS Scan`.

Of course every time to do all these steps manually is quite boring and tedious so
smart people have long ago automated this process. Quite popular tools are:
[JTAGenum](https://github.com/cyphunk/JTAGenum/tree/master) and
[JTAGULATOR](http://www.grandideastudio.com/jtagulator/).

>If the highest level of RDP 2 protection has been applied to the microcontroller,
JTAGulator and similar tools will not help.

Examples of such attacks are described in more detail in the following sources:

- [JTAG Scanning](https://github.com/cyphunk/JTAGenum/wiki/Embedded-Analysis#jtag-scanning)
- [Hardware Debugging for Reverse Engineers Part 2: JTAG, SSDs and Firmware Extraction](https://wrongbaud.github.io/posts/jtag-hdd/)
- [JTAGulator: Introduction and Demonstration](https://youtu.be/uVIsbXzQOIU)
- [03 - How To Find The JTAG Interface - Hardware Hacking Tutorial](https://youtu.be/_FSM_10JXsM)

## Attack on JTAG

> The next thing to determine is the number of devices in the JTAG chain, because even

Reviewer: Similar phrasing suggestion here:
```suggestion
The next thing an attacker will determine is the number of devices in the JTAG chain, because even
```

Author: Oops 2 :)

it to malfunction. While the microcontroller is running, short bursts (glitches)
of low or high voltage are applied at certain points in time that disrupt the normal
operation of the device. These glitches can cause errors in the execution of
processor instructions, such as skipping or incorrect execution of individual
instructions. This can cause the microcontroller to miss important safety checks.
If a glitch is successfully synchronized, it can disable security mechanisms or
access protected memory, allowing an attacker to retrieve sensitive data or gain
control of the system.

The main goal for this method is to find the exact time interval to apply this glitch.

The author of the article determines the exact time when the AHB-AP has to initialize
itself according to the value of the APPROTECT, which is stored in UICR (a dedicated
Flash memory partition) and applies the glitch at that exact time, which allows him
to bypass the protection and gain access to the DebugPort.

Again see the original article [nRF52 Debug Resurrection (APPROTECT Bypass) Part 1](https://limitedresults.com/2020/06/nrf52-debug-resurrection-approtect-bypass/)
for more details.

# Conclusion

> This article is a very superficial overview of the topic of embedded devices security
> in general and JTAG security in particular. This topic is very vast to cover in one
> article and unfortunately I am not an expert in this topic. :)

Reviewer: Here is an example rephrase with a slightly more authoritative tone! This is a great
article but understand the sentiment of wanting to highlight that cybersecurity is not
your speciality:
```suggestion
This article has only scratched the surface of embedded devices security
in general and JTAG security in particular. If you have experience
in cyber security and/or JTAG attacks, I would love to hear what you have
learned and what topics I missed!
```
